How important is the use of illustrations?
Are they simply fluff and are teaching?
One definition of the English word fluff is this.
Something essentially trivial and lacking importance
or solid worth.
Are illustrations trivial and of little worth?
Please follow along on screen as I read our theme scripture.
Matthew 1334.
All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds by illustrations.
Indeed, without an illustration, he would not speak to them.
We often call Jesus the great teacher.
Illustrations were essential to fully grasp what was being taught.
Now, we won't be spending a lot of time on the do's and don'ts
of using illustrations.
Insight on the scriptures has a whole topic on illustrations.
And the apply yourself to reading and teaching brochure
has some helpful suggestions in lesson eight.
Let me remind you also of a talk that brother
explain of the governing body gave at the 2020 regional convention.
The title was improve your skills illustrating key points.
It had some very practical suggestions, which I won't be repeating here.
So perhaps you'll want to review brother
splains talk and an upcoming family worship.
At times, the Bible actually identifies Jesus expression
as an illustration.
Most of the time, it does not.
It was just part of the way he spoke naturally.
Illustrations flowed from him.
Well, how did he come up with them so readily?
Jesus was observant of what was happening around him.
We too can be observant.
This will help to train us to think in illustrations.
The bread and the wine used at the memorial of Christ's death
beautifully represented Jesus perfect body and blood
that would be given in behalf of sinful mankind.
But we can learn something about our use of illustrations
by considering the circumstances of the Lord's evening meal.
Think about it.
From years of attending, Jesus knew what was going to be
on the Passover table that night.
So he could have thought in advance of using those emblems
in that way.
We don't know for sure.
But what a simple logical and indelible impression
it made that night and continues to make
on millions of us some 2,000 years later.
If we're going to give a talk or demonstration at one of our meetings,
we already know the topic.
So we have the luxury of thinking of an illustration in advance.
But what if we're teaching a Bible student
and he asks us an unexpected question?
At that moment, you're likely mentally consider your student,
what you know about his work, his hobbies,
or just his daily life experiences,
and an illustration may come to your mind
on the spur of the moment.
Well, let's see how that latter process,
an unexpected situation, was faced by Jesus.
In this case, we can understand his thought process
and coming up with masterful illustrations.
In John chapter four,
he's account about the Samaritan woman at the well.
John 434, Jesus used the illustration of food.
He said there,
my food is to do the will of him who sent me
and to finish his work.
That's a simple, effective illustration.
Why might he have used the generic expression food
instead of something more specific
like my wine or my bread
is to do the will of him who sent me?
Well, let's look at the context.
Interestingly, in quick succession,
Jesus used two different illustrations
and in both cases,
it seems from the context
that he came up with these
based on what was happening at the time.
John 4.7 says,
a woman of Samaria came to draw water.
Jesus said to her,
give me a drink.
Well, that set up number one
for an illustration about water.
Verse eight says,
for his disciples had gone off into the city to buy food.
That set up number two
for an illustration about food.
Now, Jesus didn't orchestrate all of this in advance.
It was just circumstantial
that Jesus asked a woman who approached
with a water jar to give him a drink.
But Jesus instantly thought
and used the subject of water
as an illustration.
Verse 10 says,
if you had known of the free gift of God
and who it is who says to you,
give me a drink,
you would have asked him
and he would have given you living water.
The illustration was spontaneous.
It effectively led to a fine witness about Jesus.
Now, illustration number two,
look at verse 27.
Jesus is still talking to the woman
when the disciples returned from the city.
I do remember that
verse eight said that the disciples had gone
into the city to buy food.
So they come back
and they have some food for Jesus.
Going to verse 28,
the woman leaves,
notice the disciples now say to Jesus,
which is a setup for illustration number two.
Not water,
but food now becomes the topic of conversation.
Verse 31.
Meanwhile, the disciples were urging him
rabbi eat.
The word eat caused Jesus
to think of the now famous illustration
that we quote regularly.
Verse 32.
But he said to them,
I have food to eat
that you do not know about.
Well, the disciples are puzzled.
Verse 33.
So the disciples said to one another,
no one brought him anything to eat, did he?
Jesus picking up on the topic at hand,
said to them,
my food is to do the will of him who sent me
and finish his work.
Now, obviously Jesus did not choreograph
all this in advance.
But based on the circumstances at hand,
he came up with illustrations that worked.
Well, in what way?
Well, which is the point of similarity
between God's will and food?
Eating good food is enjoyable.
It's satisfying.
The point.
Jesus enjoyed doing God's will.
It was satisfying to him
like eating a tasty meal.
Another point of similarity.
Food invigorates a person.
Jesus was invigorated
by that conversation with the American woman.
I'll glance back up at verses three through six.
Says Jesus had left Judea on foot.
Look at verse six.
Now Jesus tired out as he was from the journey
with sitting at the well.
It was about the six hour.
However, after witnessing to the woman at the well,
Jesus is invigorated.
He even alluded to the idea
that the experience was more energizing
than literal food.
What if we learned thus far from the process?
If you know beforehand,
what will be discussed,
that gives you the opportunity
to think of an appropriate illustration in advance.
If something comes up unexpectedly,
often you can use what you've observed around you
or what you already know
to generate an effective illustration.
You might be thinking,
I'm not really creative.
It takes a while for me to think of an illustration
even when I know in advance
that I have an assignment at the meeting.
On this spot illustration,
it's probably not going to happen for me
with the way my brain works or doesn't work.
Is there a way to train the brain
to think in illustration mode?
Yes.
How?
One way is by observing creation
or man-made inventions,
even when you don't have a talk to give,
even when your children are not with you.
Think about what you observe
and reason out how it could be applied
as a teaching lesson in the future.
Write it down if you need to
so as to remember it.
One father told me that even when his children
were not with him,
he would look at creation
and come up with a line of reasoning
that might be helpful in the future.
And he gave an example.
He observed two kittens playing together.
He reasoned.
Do those kittens look happy?
Yes.
If Jehovah knows what it takes to make two kittens happy,
do you think he knows what it would take to make you happy?
Well, obviously a child would agree.
So if Jehovah knows what it would take
to make you happy,
what should you do if Jehovah says
to do something a certain way?
Profound dad.
Do it Jehovah's way if you want to be happy.
Now the beautiful reality,
the golden moment,
was when he saw one of his sons watching two squirrels
and a tree chasing each other.
He used the squirrels as his illustration
along with the prepared line of reasoning.
Now his son still remembers that point many decades later.
Jesus brain thought creatively
when using illustrations.
For another example,
please turn with me to John 142.
Jesus changed Simon's name on the spot.
John 142.
And he and group led him Simon to Jesus.
When Jesus looked at him,
he said,
you are Simon the son of John.
You will be called Seifis,
which is translated Peter.
Now why did Jesus change his name to Seifis or Peter?
It actually seems to be a creative thinking.
The Greek word for Peter is Petros,
not Petra.
Petra means rock mass.
And that applies to Jesus,
the cornerstone,
the head of the Christian congregation.
However, Petros means a piece of rock.
What a beautiful description of Peter.
At times Peter didn't seem to be dependable.
But Jesus saw good qualities in him
and gave him the name Peter.
Petros, piece of rock.
In effect,
Jesus was saying that he would become as stable as a rock.
And that's precisely what transpired.
What a great word picture or illustration by Jesus.
At Revelation 11 under inspiration to John,
Jehovah said that that book of the Bible was
a revelation by Jesus Christ,
which God gave to him.
The insight book says
the book of Revelation concludes the Holy Scriptures
with one of the most outstanding concentrations
of illustrations found in the entire Bible.
You recall our theme is Matthew 1334.
Without an illustration,
he would not speak to them.
As another example,
Jesus gave his famous sermon on the mountain.
In Matthew chapter 7,
the last chapter of that sermon,
he used at least 10 different illustrations.
Yes, without an illustration,
he would not speak to them.
Matthew 728 sums up the sermon on the mountain,
saying,
when Jesus finished these sayings,
the effect was that the crowds were astounded
at his way of teaching.
First Peter 221 says that Jesus left a model
for us to follow his steps closely.
That includes his art of teaching
which incorporated extensive use of illustrations.
They were pithy and to the point.
May each of us train ourselves to think that way
and strive to improve our teaching skills
by means of illustrations.